Utilizing a calibration curve
-----------------------------

There were demands existing to consider within an evaluation a specific
input quantity (e.g. the detection efficiency) as being dependent on
“another” quantity (such as area mass density, or a quench factor),
which means to take its value from an associated “calibration curve” by
interpolating a polynomial function of the “other” quantity.

For this purpose, a new function KALFIT was established, for which a new
dialog allows input of values x(i) and y(i) together with their standard
uncertainties. x and y (independent and dependent variables,
respectively) represent measured values of a calibration curve. The
curve is modeled by a polynomial with maximum degree of 3 (max 4
coefficients). The polynomial coefficients are calculated by a weighted
or non-weighted (multi-) linear least squares fit.

.. math:: Y(x) = a_{1} + \ a_{2} \cdot x + \ a_{3} \cdot x^{2} + a_{4} \cdot x^{3}

Unused (empty) columns in this dialog's grid are set internally equal to 1.

Choosing a polynomial degree of 0 (i.e. 1 coefficient to be fitted),
fitting of the *y*-values results in a **weighted mean (uncertainties
given)** or in a **non-weighted mean (uncertainties not given).** Its
standard uncertainty is that of the mean, i.e. already divided by the
square root of the number of values.

**Activating the calibration curve tool:**

.. math:: eps = \text{KALFIT}(1, eskv)
    :label: cali_curve_eq2

In this example KALFIT is called to determine the detection efficiency
value **eps** (and its uncertainty) **as a function of** a quench factor
**eskv** by using the fitted polynomial for interpolation.

The second parameter (i.er., eskv) represents a value of the
**independent quantity X**, by which value and standard uncertainty of
the dependent quantity Y (in this case of **eps**) are determined.

The first parameter of this function (here: 1) gives the information
about how to use the calibration curve for calculating the value of the
left side of Eq. :eq:`cali_curve_eq2` The value 1 means that the value for Y is
calculated (read) as polynomial just as shown above. The value 2 means
that the value for Y is determined by reversing the polynomial. An
example for the latter case is treated in the UR project
:file:`Example_8_with_KALFIT_EN.txp`, for which the Eq. :eq:`cali_curve_eq2` above is replaced
by:

.. math:: Cx = \text{KALFIT}(2, Rnet)
    :label: cali_curve_eq3


It means that Rnet designates count rates, which in a first step are
calibrated as polynomial function dependent on known concentration
values x: Rnet = Polynomial(x). The second step is to measure a count
rate Rnetx of another sample and to determine then its associated
concentration Cx. Assuming a degree 1 of the polynomial one would
calculate the concentration Cx by (Rnetx-a\ :sub:`1`)/a\ :sub:`2`; for a
higher-degree polynomial a numerical bisection method is used for the
inversion. In the mentioned UR project, the concentration refers to that
of Potassium given in g/L.

This KALFIT call invokes a new dialog (there is also a new item under
the main menu Edit), by which the x- and y-values of such a calibration
curve (including their standard uncertainties) can be input; the desired
value for eps is taken via its x-value eskv from the polynomial curve
for the y-values. Another button allows executing the polynomial fitting
(max. degree of polynomial = 3) such that the final value and the
standard uncertainty are made available to UR for the quantity eps.

The standard uncertainty of the desired Y-value (eps) is calculated by
numerical uncertainty propagation using the fitted parameters
:math:`a_{i}` and their covariance matrix and the uncertainty of the
given x-value :math:`x_{0}` (eskv).

.. math:: u^{2}(Y) = {\left( \frac{\partial Y}{\partial x_{0}} \right)^{2}u}^{2}\left( x_{0} \right) + \left\lbrack \sum_{1}^{m}\left( \frac{\partial Y}{\partial a_{i}} \right)^{2}u^{2}\left( a_{i} \right) + 2\sum_{i = 1}^{m - 1}{\sum_{j = i + 1}^{m}{\frac{\partial Y}{\partial a_{i}}\frac{\partial Y}{\partial a_{j}}}u\left( a_{i},a_{j} \right)} \right\rbrack

.. figure:: /images/dialog_cali_example.png
    :align: center
    :alt: KALFIT example
    :scale: 85

    KALFIT example

Although eps – as defined by the equation above – formally is a
dependent quantity, it is treated in UR as if it were an independent
quantity, e.g. regarding the uncertainty budget.

Currently, UR assumes that the value of only one input quantity is
determined by a call to KALFIT.

The uncertainties of the x-values are currently not considered.

The following dialog shows an example of calculating a mean value
(degree of polynomial equal to zero); the values to averaged are always
the ones in the column for y(i).

.. figure:: /images/dialog_cali_average.png
    :align: center
    :alt: Example mean value from KALFIT
    :scale: 85

    Example mean value from KALFIT
